Chapter 5
Mrs Penniman’s Plan
 Catherine did not speak about Morris to her father.
 After some days, he said to her, ‘I’m lucky to have a good daughter.’
 ‘I’m trying to be good,’ she answered.
 Catherine did not see Morris at this time, but she wrote to him. A long letter of
five pages. Morris thought it was long. She asked him not to visit for a time.
 Morris wrote back. He talked about his meeting with Dr Sloper. ‘Your father
was very angry,’ he wrote. ‘I was very polite. You must be strong. You must fight.’
 Catherine did not like to think of fighting her father. But she did not like to
think of losing her lover. She tried to think of an answer to make everybody happy.
She decided to be quiet and to wait. ‘Good fathers are always very careful about their
daughters’ husbands,’ she thought.
 Mrs Penniman did not help Catherine much. She loved this little story and her
place in it. She wanted Catherine to run away with Morris and marry him. She carried
a picture in her head: two lovers — with Mrs Penniman — marrying in a small church
in a New York back street; living in a dark flat with no money; waiting for visits from
Mrs Penniman, their only friend. She wanted to put this picture before Morris. She
wrote to him daily about Washington Square. She asked him to meet her in a
small restaurant on Seventh Avenue. When Morris arrived, half an hour late, they sat
together in the darkest corner at the back of the place. This was the happiest half an
hour of Mrs Penniman’s life. Morris was not happy. He listened to her but he did not
like her. He was happy to use her at the beginning, to get a foot in Washington
Square. But he did not want her now: she always said the wrong thing. He was cold
but polite. Mrs Penniman told Morris her plan.
 ‘Run away with Catherine?’ cried Morris.
 ‘Yes,’ said Mrs Penniman, now afraid for her plan. ‘Tell Catherine’s father
about it only after you marry. You can show him that you’re not interested in the
money. And then you’ll get his good opinion. And there’s always the ten thousand
from her mother. He cannot cut that off’
 ‘Oh, don’t speak ot that,’ he said. ‘I’m afraid of coming between Catherine and
her money.’

‘Be afraid of nothing; then everything will go well.’
 Mrs Penniman paid for her cup of tea and they went out together into the dark
street. Morris walked with Mrs Penniman back to Washington Square. She went in.
He looked up at the house. He thought it was a very nice house.
♦
 When Mrs Penniman told Catherine of her meeting with Morris, Catherine was
angry for the first time in her life.
 ‘I don’t think it was right,’ she said.
 Mrs Penniman began to read the evening newspaper. After a long wait,
Catherine spoke.‘Was he sad?’
 ‘He was dark under the eyes. Very different from when I first saw him. But
very handsome.’ A long wait again.
 ‘Why are you always cold and quiet, Catherine?’

‘And I don’t think it’s your place to teach me what’s right,’ Lavinia said.
 The girl turned quickly. ‘Does he say that?’
 ‘He says you are afraid of your father.’
 ‘I am afraid of my father.’
 ‘So will you break with Morris?’
 Catherine looked at her aunt. ‘Why do you push me?’
 ‘I’m afraid you don’t see the importance of what you do. You must not lose this
young naan.’
 ‘I don’t think that you understand me or know me. Please do not have any more
secret meetings with Mr Townsend. I don’t think it’s right.’

‘And I don’t think it’s your place to teach me what’s right.’ Lavinia said a short
goodnight and went to bed.
♦
 Later that evening, Catherine spoke to her father.
 ‘Father, I want to see Morris again.’
 ‘To say goodbye?’ asked the doctor.
 ‘No, to ask him to wait.’
 He looked at her. ‘You’re a good child.’ She went to him and he put his arm
round her. ‘I want you to break with him. My opinion of him is the same as when I
first met him. You’re not happy now, I know. But in three months or three years, you
can be happy again. Marry Morris, and you’ll never be happy.’
 ‘But you can like him,’ said the sad child. ‘We can wait.’
 ‘When I die, you can marry,’ the doctor said quietly.
 ‘Don’t say that, father,’ cried Catherine. ‘Try to like Morris. He’s a good man.’
 ‘I never want to speak to him again. But tell him this. You marry him, and you
get nothing from me.’
 ‘You’re right to say that. We don’t want your money.’
 ‘Say that to him. Listen to his answer and watch him. Watch for an angry face.’
 ‘He’s never angry with me, father,’ she said. Her eyes were wet.

Her father pushed her out of the room and shut the door.
 ‘I think I’ll see him. Only one more time.’
 ‘Then you’re a bad daughter to me.’
 This was too much for Catherine. She cried and cried. She ran to her father but
he turned away. He pushed her out ot the room and shut the door. He heard her crying
and knew she was behind the door. But he did not move. He was sorry for her, but
there was a smile round his eyes.
♦
 That night Catherine cried for many hours, with Aunt Penniman’s arm round
her. ‘Good!’ thought Mrs Penniman.The next morning, she came back into
Catherine’s room. Catherine was dressed and ready for breakfast. ‘Don’t go to
breakfast, Catherine,’ Aunt Penmman said. ‘You won’t move your father — you must
be weak and ill, not well and strong.’
 ‘I must go, aunt. I’m only afraid of being late.’

Catherine wrote to Morris that day. She asked him to visit the next day, at a
time when her father was not at home. 

Chapter 6
The Long Wait
 Morris was more handsome than Catherine remembered. He put his arms round
her. She knew that she loved him very much.
 ‘Why did you send for me?’
 ‘Because I wanted to see you,’ said the girl quietly.
 ‘Do you want only to look at me? Or to tell me something?’
 He waited. Then he suddenly said, ‘Marry me tomorrow. Take me or leave me.
Decide between me and your father.’
 ‘I want you, Morris. But we must wait. We must be strong. I said to Father last
night, “We don’t want your money.” ’
 His face went red, but he smiled and spoke. No, he was not angry. The money
was not important. He loved her very much.
 ‘Yes!’ cried Catherine, ‘we must marry as soon as we can!’ She put her arms
round him and closed her eyes.
 He left soon after. They did not decide on a day to marry. Morris wanted to
think. When was the cleverest time to marry? He did not want the girl without the
money. He thought about the ten thousand from Catherine’s mother. That was not a
good living. Not for Morris Townsend. But then, it was better than nothing.
*
 Mrs Penniman asked Morris Townsend to a second secret meeting. This time
they met outside a church.
 ‘I see the thing differently from our last meeting,’ said Mrs Penniman.
 ‘Every time I see you, you say something different.’
 ‘My head is never quiet. I don’t think you can marry Catherine now. My
brother says he’s going to throw me out of the house. You know I’m not a rich
woman.’
 ‘But Catherine says we must marry now, in secret. How can I get out of it
now?’
 ‘Catherine loves you very much. You can do anything with her. You can say
you must wait.’

‘Ah!’ said Morris quietly.
 Catherine’s days were long at this time. Her father never looked at her or spoke
to her. This was his plan. He waited for Catherine to speak first.
 ‘I think that Morris and I will marry,’ she said one day.
 ‘When? In the next four or five months?’ he asked.
 ‘I don’t know, father,’ said Catherine, ‘we cannot decide.’
 ‘Then wait for six months. I’ll take you to Europe. I want you to come with
me.’
 Catherine was happy to say ‘yes’ to her father.

Mrs Penniman asked Morris Townsend to a second secret meeting. This time they met
outside a church. 

Dr Sloper did not ask Mrs Penniman to go to Europe. She wanted to go but she
did not show it. ‘Washington Square is going to be nice and quiet,’ she said to Mrs
Almond. Catherine met Morris before she left. Tie asked questions.
 ‘Do you want to see all those famous things over there?’
 ‘Oh no, Morris!’ said Catherine quickly.
 ‘What is this woman interested in!?’ thought Morris.
 ‘Father thinks I’ll forget you,’ said Catherine, ‘but I won’t. He’ll be angry with
me.’
 ‘Yes, I think you’re right. But the visit to Europe is a good thing. He wants you
to go and he’ll be happy,’ said Morris. ‘1 don’t want you to lose your money — not
for me, but for you and your children. When you’re in Europe, decide on a good
time and place — an evening in Venice — and then perhaps you can move your
father. Ask him to say yes, you can marry Morris.’ Catherine thought this was a clever
plan.
♦
 Europe was very interesting to Dr Sloper, so they stayed for twelve months, not
six. Mrs Penniman lived well in Washington Square, and so did Morris Townsend.
Mrs Penniman liked to ask him to tea. He had his chair — a very easy armchair — by
the fire in the back sitting room. He drank the doctor’s Madeira and smoked his
cigars.
 ♦
 In the first six months that Dr Sloper and his daughter were in Europe, they
never spoke of Morris Townsend. Catherine followed her father quietly and politely
through the mountains of Switzerland and the buildings and pictures of Italy. She
gave no opinion about any of these places or things and her father did not ask for it.
She was not a thinking woman.
 One day father and daughter were in a quiet place in the Alps. The driver took
their bags on and they walked together a little. Cold red light washed over the sky.
Next to the mountains the two people were very small, but they were not afraid. They
walked on in the dying light. Dr Sloper came close to his daughter and stopped.
He suddenly asked her, ‘Are you going to break with him?’
 ‘No, father,’ Catherine answered.
 ‘Does he write to you?’

‘Yes, I get two letters every month.’
 The doctor looked at the mountains above them. ‘I’m very angry,’ he said,‘and
I must tell you that I can be a very hard man.’
 For the next week they did not say a word. And for the next six months they did
not speak about Morris. But on their last night in Europe, before their ship left
Liverpool for New York, he spoke again. ‘Are you going to marry him as soon as you
arrive in New York?’
 ‘I cannot tell before we arrive,’ Catherine answered.
 ‘Please tell me before you marry. When a man is going to lose his only child,
he likes to know before.’

Chapter 7
A Difficult Time
 ‘I saw Morris often when you were away,’ said Catherine’s aunt.
 ‘I know from his letters that you were very nice to him. 1 won’t forget that,
aunt.’
 ‘He liked to come and talk. I gave him tea — that was all. Your Aunt Almond
thought it was too much. He liked to sit in your father’s room,’ she said and smiled.
 Catherine was quiet for a minute. 

They talked for some time as lovers. Catherine questioned him closely about his job
and he asked about Europe and her father’s opinion.
 ‘I’m sorry that he went into Father’s room,’ she said. Then she asked, ‘Does he
have a job?’

‘Yes, only a week ago, he found a job. He’s working with a friend, buying and
selling something. He asked me to tell you as soon as you arrived.’
 ‘Oh, that’s good to hear!’ said Catherine, very happy.
 ‘You see, Morris was right to wait for the right job. What can your father say
now?’
 ‘Father’s opinion is the same as before, only stronger. But his opinion isn’t
important to me any more,’ she said.
 ‘You’re much stronger now,’ said Mrs Penniman. ‘What about your father’s
money?’
 ‘I’m not interested in my father’s money. Morris doesn’t think it’s important.’
 ‘Perhaps he thinks it’s a little important,’ said Aunt Lavinia after a minute,
 ‘I have money from my mother. And now Morris has a job. He and I have
everything. I’m never going to ask my father for anything. I am home and 1 want to
marry.’
❖
 Morris came to Washington Square the next day.
 ‘I’m very happy to see you again,’ he said with a smile.
 'They talked for some time as lovers. Catherine questioned him closely about
his job and he asked about Europe and her father’s opinion. He often got up and
walked round the room, and came back and smiled again.
 Morris smiled all the time. ‘I must try to move him,’ he said. ‘I’m a proud man.
I want to show him that he’s wrong.’
 ‘Morris, we must ask for nothing. I know now that he doesn’t like me much.
It’s because of my mother. She was very beautiful and I’m not. He’s always thinking
of her. Aunt Penniman told me that.’
 Morris was angry. ‘What a difficult family!’
 ‘You must be nice to me, Morris. You must always like me.’
 Morris said, ‘I will.’ It was not difficult to say.
The doctor spoke to Mrs Almond. ‘I know of his visits to my house. I can see
where he sat in the chair by the fire.’
 ‘His plan is to take anything,’ said Mrs Almond. ‘He lived on Lavinia for a
year.’
 Mrs Penniman wrote to Morris. She wanted to see him. Morris angrily threw
her letter into the fire. She wanted to come to his office. He said no — his office was
very difficult to find. They met for a walk. Mrs Penniman had nothing new to say.
But Morris had something to say.
 ‘I know the doctor is the same. He’s never going to give us anything. Don’t talk
to me about him. The fight is finished. I’m the loser. I’m not going to marry
Catherine!’
 ‘Morris, she loves you very much. Do you know that?’
 ‘No, I don’t. I don’t want to know. You must be a good friend to her. The
doctor can help you.’
 ‘The doctor! He’ll say, “I told you! He was no good!” ’
 Morris went very red. ‘You can tell her that I don’t want to come between her
and her father. And I don’t want her to lose her money because of me.’
 ‘You’re very clever with words,’ said Mrs Penniman.
 ‘I must do something very clever with my life next,’ he said. ‘This is not clever
at all.’
♦
 Morris came to see Catherine. He said suddenly, ‘I’m going away to New
Orleans. I’m going to buy some coffee.’
 ‘Take me with you,’ said Catherine.
 ‘No, it’s a dirty and dangerous place. People get ill there.’
 ‘Then you must not go. When people are going to marry, buying coffee is not
important. Think about me, not coffee. We must not wait too long.’ She spoke
strongly, her hands on Morris’s arm. Was this the time to break with Catherine?
 ‘I don’t like this noisy Catherine. I like you when you’re quiet,’ said Morris.
 ‘But I don’t ask much of you. When are you coming again?’ ‘Saturday,’ he
answered and smiled. 

‘Come tomorrow. I’m very quiet now. Please, tomorrow.’
 ‘I said Saturday,’ he said, but did not smile this time. ‘Tomorrow I’ll be in the
office.’ She looked at his hard, cold eyes.
 ‘Morris,’ she said quietly, ‘you’re going to leave me.’
 ‘Yes. I’ll write to you — that’s better.’
 ‘Morris, I gave up everything for you!’ she cried.
 ‘You can have it all back.’
 ‘Morris, why are you doing this now? What is different?’
 ‘Wait for my letter.’
 ‘Ah, you’re not coming back.’
 He got away from her and closed the door behind him. 

Chapter 8
After the Dance
 Catherine cried all day and sat up all night. She waited for Morris to come to
the house. He did not come. He did not come the next day. He did not write.
 Catherine wrote a short letter to him: ‘Morris, I’m sorry and 1 don’t understand.
You’re killing me!’ No answer.
 The doctor watched all this happening. After a few days he spoke to his sister,
Lavinia. ‘The story is finished,’ he said. ‘I’m very happy to be in the right.’ He put his
hands together, jumped up and laughed. ‘Hah! I knew it.’
One Sunday afternoon Catherine came back from a walk. Her face was red and her
eyes were wet.
 One Sunday afternoon Catherine came back from a walk. Her face was red and
her eyes were wet. Mrs Penniman questioned her closely and learned that her walk
was to Mrs Montgomery’s house on Second Avenue. There she heard that Morris left
New York some days before. 
Two days later, a letter arrived from Philadelphia. The writer did not want to
come between Catherine and her father or her father’s money. He wanted her to be
happy and to stay friends with him in the years to come. He was sorry. Catherine
thought it was a beautiful letter and read it many times over the next tew years.
 One day Dr Sloper found Catherine sitting with her work.
 ‘Can you tell me when you’re going to leave my house? When you go, your
aunt goes too,’ he said.
 She got up. She put her work away. Her face was hot.
 ‘I’m not going away,’ said Catherine.
 ‘Did he break with you?’ said the doctor.
 ‘1 asked him to leave New York. He’s not coming back tor a long time,’ she
said.
 ‘Oh,’ he said. ‘You’re not a nice girl, Catherine — to play with him for more
than a year and then forget hint!’
♦
 Catherine learned a hard lesson. She never spoke of the pain inside her in the
weeks and months following the break with Morris. Her father never learned the truth.
 ‘Catherine had her little dance,’ he said to Mrs Almond, ‘and now she’s sitting
down.’
 At different times in the following years, four men asked Catherine to marry
them. She said no to them all. She worked hard for churches and hospitals. She went
out in society and everybody liked her. 

Twenty years later, Morris Townsend, now fat and with very little hair, arrived at
Washington Square.
 Dr Sloper died when he was seventy. Some of his money went to Catherine and
her aunts. But most of it went to hospitals across the United States.
♦
 Twenty years later, Morris Townsend, now fat and with very little hair, arrived
at Washington Square. Catherine did not ask him to sit down. This was not her
Morris, her lover of years ago.
 ‘Can we be friends again?’ he asked, and came closer to her. ‘Catherine, I think
of you always.’
 ‘Please don’t say these things,’ she answered.
 ‘We can forget the past now. We can do anything.’
 ‘1 cannot forget the past. Please do not come again,’ she said. Morris looked
round the room at all the things. ‘Goodbye then. I’m sorry.’
 Outside the room, an excited Mrs Pennirnan waited.
 ‘Hah! That was a good plan, Mrs Pennirnan!’ said Morris, and pulled his hat
hard on his head. ‘She’s not interested in me! But she never married — why?’
 ‘Good question,’ said Mrs Pennirnan. ‘But you must come back. You must try
again.’
 ‘Come back! Never!’ and he walked out of the house. Catherine took up her
work and sat down — for life. 

